Elm review v2 (#1)
jfmengels/blog: content/blog/elm-review-v2/index.md

---
title: elm-review v2!
date: '2020-04-30T00:00:00.000Z'
---

Today I am very excited to release `elm-review` 2.0.0 and to share its new features!

tl;dr: Here is the list of the introduced features:

#### New review capabilities!

> - Project rules!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Project-wide rules!
```
maybe? Reading "Project rules", my first thought was that you could visit non-code resources at least 🙂

Author: That's what I called it at first :D

> my first thought was that you could visit non-code resources at least :slightly_smiling_face:

You can :D. You can visit:
- the elm.json file
- the README
- access the dependencies' information

In the case of project rules, you can even report errors for the two first ones.

So I think this still makes sense. Especially since I now call it like this everywhere in the documentation, in contrast to module rules which can access the same information but only report errors inside a module (which is a code-resource).

- Reporting errors for `elm.json`

> - Reading the dependencies' `docs.json` file

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Full knowledge of direct and indirect dependencies
```
As someone who has no idea what `docs.json` does, something like this might be more helpful 🙂

Author: Yeah, that makes sense. It's not "full" though, since you can't read the implementation details, you can just access the publicly exposed information. What you wrote sounds good though :stuck_out_tongue: 

I'll think of other wordings :+1:

- Visiting the README.md file
- Visiting the comments and documentation

> - Adding helpers

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- New helpers for creating rules
```
or some such 🙂

`elm-review` is a static code analysis tool for Elm, which looks at your Elm project, and reports patterns that you configured it to find using "rules" in a friendly Elm compiler-like way.

It is highly customizable because you can write your own rules. Since these are written in Elm, you don't need to know a different language to do so, and you can even publish them as Elm packages!

I put a lot of effort into making a [**very nice API**](https://package.elm-lang.org/packages/jfmengels/elm-review/2.0.0/Review-Rule) for you to use ([here](https://github.com/jfmengels/review-simplification/blob/master/src/NoBooleanCaseOf.elm) [are](https://github.com/jfmengels/review-debug/blob/master/src/NoDebug/Log.elm) [some](https://package.elm-lang.org/packages/jfmengels/elm-review/2.0.0/Review-Rule#withSimpleExpressionVisitor) [examples](https://package.elm-lang.org/packages/jfmengels/elm-review/2.0.0/Review-Rule#withSimpleImportVisitor)), even going through the lengths of discovering new Elm techniques (expect to see blog posts on the **phantom builder pattern** on this blog), and I am very happy with the result!

> To some, `elm-review` looks like a linter. Which isn't necessarily wrong, since you can enable rules that help improve the quality of your code. If you dive a bit further, you will find out that it can enforce coding conventions for your team, and create new guarantees that the Elm compiler can not give you.

Reviewer: This entire paragraph describes exactly what a linter is in my mind, though `elm-review` is probably more geared towards customization than the average linter 🙂 I would probably just leave this out, since it's already covered pretty well by the preceding paragraphs 😊

Author: Yeah, I guess I phrased it wrong :thinking: 

I've changed it to the following:
```
To some, `elm-review` looks like a linter. Which isn't necessarily wrong, since you can enable rules that help improve the quality of your code and enforce coding conventions for your team.

If you dive a bit further, you will find out that it can create new guarantees that the Elm compiler can not give you.

For instance you can write rules that
...
```

If it feels like a linter to you because that's what ESLint does too, it's because ESLint is also more than a linter (and should probably have a different name :man_shrugging:).

Reviewer: I mean, the description for the original lint goes ([from wiki](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lint_(software))): "lint, or a linter, is a tool that analyzes source code to flag programming errors, bugs, stylistic errors, and suspicious constructs.[1] The term originates from a Unix utility that examined C language source code.[2]"

But any linter still has to be configured with rules, so to my mind, `elm-review` is still a linter, even if it is a very customizable one. I'll let you decide on what to say though, but I do still think this paragraph just repeats what you've just written 🙂

Reviewer: Though I guess it depends on what you consider to be in the "errors, bugs, stylistic errors" category 😛

Author: Yeah, the definition is very loose.

> But any linter still has to be configured with rules

Have you met https://standardjs.com/ or https://github.com/psf/black? :smile:

For instance you can write rules that

- report when you [pass values outside of 0-255 to `Css.rgb255`](https://package.elm-lang.org/packages/folq/review-rgb-ranges/latest/)
- give an error if any `Regex.fromString` calls have invalid regexes (for literal strings)

> Unfortunately, as soon as a problem spawns multiple modules, you wouldn't be able to enforce those guarantees. But that was the case until we got...

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With `elm-review` v1, the analysis broke down as soon as a problem spanned multiple modules though, but that's now solved by:
```

## Project rules!

In `elm-review` version 1, `Elm Analyse`, `ESLint` and a lot of similar tools for other languages, the analysis is scoped to a single file.

> This means that when a rule has finished looking at module A and starts looking at module B, it forgets everything about module A. That means we can't answer a lot of questions that we would like the answer to, such as:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This means that when a rule has finished looking at module A, and starts looking at module B, it forgets everything about module A. This makes a lot of interesting analysis untenable, like:
```

- Which module does function `xyz` come from? If a module is imported using `import A exposing (..)`, then we potentially lose the ability to tell. We have the same problem with types when encountering `import A exposing (B(..))`.
- What is the type of an imported function?
- Is this element ever used in the project?

> In addition to the **module rules** that we just described, `elm-review` now has **project rules**. These rules go through all the modules and can use information collected from a different module to infer or report things, solving the problems mentioned above.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In addition to the old **module rules**, `elm-review` now has **project rules**. These rules go through all the modules and can use information collected from a different module to infer or report things, solving the problems mentioned above.
```

Author: I'll keep the current wording I think, because otherwise the notion of **modules rules** pops out of nowhere. The current wording explain that module rules are the thing we just talked about.

This opens up a wide range of possibilities. A few example use-cases:

- [Report custom type constructors that aren't used anywhere in the project](https://package.elm-lang.org/packages/jfmengels/review-unused/latest/NoUnused-CustomTypeConstructors)
- [Report functions/types that are exposed but are never used in the project](https://package.elm-lang.org/packages/jfmengels/review-unused/latest/NoUnused-Exports)
- [Report unused modules](https://package.elm-lang.org/packages/jfmengels/review-unused/latest/NoUnused-Modules)
- Report unused fields in records
- Report when `Html.lazy` is used incorrectly
- Report when a variable that should contain all the possible variants of a custom type is missing a variant
- Report when a module uses another module's `update` function but not the `subscription` function
- Report unused CSS classes from your CSS files (would require you to generate an Elm file from the CSS files in the configuration folder)

## Reporting errors for elm.json

In version 1, reading the contents of `elm.json` was possible, but it wasn't possible to report errors for it.

## Reading the dependencies' docs.json file

> The `docs.json` file for the dependencies contain all the public information about your direct and indirect dependencies. Reading these can tell you which dependency a module comes from, along what types and functions they contain.

Reviewer: "Getting this information from the `docs.json` file is much faster and simpler than parsing all the Elm code in the entire dependency tree for information" or some such might be nice 🙂

Author: To do it the parsing way, you'd basically need to clone the repos for every dependency :sweat_smile:

Reviewer: Isn't the Elm code part of the package that gets downloaded? Or is that just something I dreamt up? 😛

Author: Yeah, it is downloaded at some point, you're right.
I have no clue about how that is done and where that endpoint lies though. Since it's undocumented (unlike the `docs.json`), I prefer not to use that. But yes, you're right :+1:

Author: FYI, if the `docs.json` are not found locally, `elm-review` downloads it from the packages website. I have no clue how you could download the files though (I don't know if there is a separate endpoint on the packages' API, or whether it downloads things manually from GitHub)

This gives you a lot of information about your direct and indirect dependencies, for instance what modules they contain and which functions and types are defined in there.

With this information, rules can be much more accurate. For instance, knowing what is added to the scope when encountering `import Xyz exposing (..)` becomes possible.

Added to the new information you get from the previous points, you now have sufficient knowledge to replicate the compiler's type inference logic!

Example use-cases:

- Report unused imports of the form `exposing (..)` or `exposing(..)` (coming soon in [`jfmengels/review-unused`](https://package.elm-lang.org/packages/jfmengels/review-unused/latest/NoUnused-Variables))
- [Report unused dependencies](https://package.elm-lang.org/packages/jfmengels/review-unused/latest/NoUnused-Dependencies)
- [Report dependencies with unknown or incompatible licenses](https://github.com/jfmengels/elm-review/blob/master/tests/NoInvalidLicense.elm#L21)

## Visiting the README.md file

The README is an integral part of the project especially for packages. For package authors and their users, it is important that everything in there is correct.

> This version introduces a visitor for the README, which allows you to collect data from it and to report errors for it that can be automatically fixed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This version introduces a visitor for the README, which allows you to collect data and report errors on it.
```

- Make sure the links in your `README.md` point to existing modules
- Report invalid or badly formatted Markdown content

## Visiting the comments and documentation

With this version, you can also look at the contents of the comments or documentation of a function or module (To be honest, this was just me forgetting to add a visitor for it, it would have been an easy addition to v1).

Example use-cases (most of these are on my todo list for [`jfmengels/review-documentation`](https://package.elm-lang.org/packages/jfmengels/review-documentation/latest/)):

- Making sure that the `@docs` in the module documentation are always correct and up to date
- Report links to non-existing or non-exposed modules, or even to invalid functions/section ids
- Reporting duplicate Markdown sections
- Report the usage of words like `TODO`

## Adding helpers

Some tasks, like targeting a specific function, are harder than they should be. For instance, if you want to forbid `Foo.bar`, you'll need to handle multiple ways that the function can be called and imported, which is tedious and error-prone.

> I started writing a helper named [`elm-review-scope`](https://github.com/jfmengels/elm-review-scope) that deals with this problem, and makes some tasks as easy as they should be.

Reviewer: If you still intend for `elm-review-scope` to be unstable, it might be nice to mention it here 🙂

## Much faster, and with a watch mode

Version 1 focused on usability and on validating that `elm-review` was a good solution to the problems it tried to solve. Therefore, I put few efforts into making a performant tool at the time.

With version 2, performance was a focus, and the results are really good. Parsed files are now cached, so the initial run is still a bit slow, but subsequent runs are faster by several times.

There is also a **watch mode** where the changes feel instantaneous.

And I am sure we can do much better for future versions! The work done here should help pave the way to having editor support.

## Configuring exceptions

> When you enabled a rule in version 1, you wouldn't able to ignore any errors that it reported. You had to edit or fork the rule to ignore the cases you wanted to ignore.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When you enabled a rule in version 1, you weren't able to ignore any errors that it reported. You had to edit or fork the rule to ignore the cases you wanted to ignore.
```

> The idea behind that was to avoid ignoring errors locally through a comment of some sort like what happens all over the place with `ESLint` ([which leads to all sorts of problems](https://github.com/jfmengels/elm-review/#is-there-a-way-to-ignore-an-error-or-disable-a-rule-only-in-some-locations)), and instead to have users [think on whether enabling a rule is a good idea](https://github.com/jfmengels/elm-review/#when-to-write-or-enable-a-rule) in the first place. And I still stand by these choices!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The idea was to avoid ignoring errors locally through a comment of some sort, like what happens all over the place with `ESLint` ([which leads to all sorts of problems](https://github.com/jfmengels/elm-review/#is-there-a-way-to-ignore-an-error-or-disable-a-rule-only-in-some-locations)). Instead users should [think on whether enabling a rule is a good idea](https://github.com/jfmengels/elm-review/#when-to-write-or-enable-a-rule) in the first place. And I still stand by these choices!
```

But there are places where it's reasonable to ignore review errors, namely for generated code and vendored code, and for introducing a rule gradually when there are too many errors. Sometimes, it also makes sense to have tests follow slightly different rules.

In these cases, you can [configure your rules](https://package.elm-lang.org/packages/jfmengels/elm-review/2.0.0/Review-Rule#configuring-exceptions) to not apply on a section on some directories or some files.

## fix-all flag

Version 1 had a `fix` flag, where it would propose automatic fixes for some of the problems that it knew how to fix, and you could accept or refuse them.

For some, it was very annoying to go through all the fixes as this could be long and tedious when you had a lot of errors.

So this version comes with a `--fix-all` where you get one big diff between the current source and the one where all fixes have been applied, and you can accept or refuse it.

> I do not believe automatic fixes to always be perfect, and I know that there are some kinks in a few of the ones I wrote, so please be cautious when looking at the before/after diff and don't commit the changes blindingly.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
I do not believe automatic fixes to always be perfect, and I know that there are some kinks in a few of the ones I wrote, so please be cautious when looking at the before/after diff and don't commit the changes blindly.
```

`elm-review` on the other hand aims to create guarantees tailored to your team and project, while enabling ways to improve the quality of the code too in a shareable manner.

If you think you have a rule that could be use to everyone, you can share it by publishing it in the Elm package registry.

##### Functionality-wise

Most checks (their naming for a rule) you can find in `Elm Analyse` are available in the packages I published or GitHub repos I have written. The remaining ones are ones that are outdated or that I disagree with, but these are reasonably easy to write using this package's API. (Exception for the checks for unused patterns and unused arguments which I plan to add). And anyone can publishing the missing ones if they care to.

From the tests I have run, I found `elm-review` to be faster. I am guessing that that is mostly because rules are built in a way that avoid duplicate work.

Here are the things that `Elm Analyse` has and `elm-review` hasn't:

> - There is no web interface, but there is a similar CLI watch mode.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- A web interface, but `elm-review` has a similar CLI watch mode.
```

- `elm-review` doesn't show the graph of modules, but I don't really see the value that brings.
- `elm-review` doesn't show when dependencies can be updated. I see the value, but I don't think it is a good fit for the tool.
- There is no editor support for `elm-review`, but let me know if you want to help out with that!

As for the rest, I hope to have shown in this post and in the [original announcement](/announcing-elm-review/) what this tool can do that `Elm Analyse` can not.

## Get started!

If you already use `elm-review` in your projects, you can follow this [migration guide](https://github.com/jfmengels/elm-review/blob/master/documentation/Migration%20v1%20to%20v2.md). Otherwise, follow these instructions!

```bash
cd your-project/

# Using npm
npm install --save-dev elm-review
# Using Yarn
yarn add --dev elm-review

# Create a configuration

> npx elm-review init

Reviewer: What's `npx`?

Author: It's a tool that comes with `npm` and allows you to run binaries from the `node_modules` without adding them to your PATH
